---
title: "Poking at a New Era of Opinionated, Malleable Software"
date: "2026-02-09"
description: "What Poke reveals about how we see and create our software today."
tags: ["design", "AI", "software"]
---

I first discovered Poke by The Interaction Company of California when I scrolled past post after post of text message screenshots on my daily tech Twitter stroll. After one tweet, I learned that Poke was an AI assistant that users interact with in native messaging platforms like iMessage, Telegram, and WhatsApp. After three, it seemed like you had to banter with a snarky-toned Poke to prove why you are worthy of trying the product. After five, I realized that the monthly pricing wasn’t set, and that you had to come to a compromise before you could start using its assistant-like features. It seemed like Poke was designed to be difficult to use, which at face value seems like the wrong approach — common sense says that technology should remove the friction out of things that are annoying to do. Why, then, would so many people willingly want to converse with an AI chatbot prompt engineered with an attitude and spend at least 30 minutes of their life negotiating a monthly fee for its services, which they have yet to try? And more broadly, what does Poke's intentionally *difficult* design reveal about how we see and create our software today?  

One, software has shifted from something that is purely for utility to something that is a form of expression and social capital. Because there are so many comparable options available for the same goal (e.g. budgeting, photo editing), what you choose says something about who you are and what you value. If you wanted to edit photos on your phone, you could use the default adjustment capabilities that come packaged with your Photos app, but if you wanted to be fancy like a seasoned photographer, you could opt for Adobe Lightroom instead. Don’t want anything to do with Adobe and its looming subscriptions? You could use Google’s free Snapseed editor, or lean into your cool person film aesthetic filters with VSCO. While other spaces like photo editing have more alternatives, the current AI assistant world is still run by a few major players like ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, and Perplexity, which are your “off of the shelf” utility tools tailored for a very general audience (though Claude does have a lean towards a more indie, creative and developer niche, and Perplexity has been targeting students). In this environment, giving Poke a shot shows a curiosity towards AI — that you’re tapped in and willing to give up some amount of time and personal information to try a new technology.   

It also shows that you have the grit and patience to try to get to the actual product *despite* the fact that Poke is difficult to talk to. Most companies try to make this onboarding and conversion process as quick as possible while also maintaining the hype and exclusivity that comes with limited pools of invites that create artificial scarcity and FOMO. However, Poke lets every user have a shot — you just need to “convince the assistant why you in particular deserve to use it.” Once you send your first message, Poke asks you to link an email account to verify your identity, where it pulls contextual information about who you are (job, company, location, social media, etc.) All of this information is used as potential  ammo against you in your conversation. You can’t simply answer that you “consider yourself a first adopter” in response to Poke’s “but why should i let you in?” as this [fintech founder](https://www.linkedin.com/feed/update/urn:li:ugcPost:7370879224322121728?commentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Acomment%3A%28ugcPost%3A7370879224322121728%2C7371144142938144768%29&dashCommentUrn=urn%3Ali%3Afsd_comment%3A%287371144142938144768%2Curn%3Ali%3AugcPost%3A7370879224322121728%29) realizes. “that’s what everyone says. you’ve got a 20th wedding anniversary coming up, so clearly you’re good at commitment. but i need more than generic promises.” For some, this disrespect is an easy sign to delete the product and move on. For [others](https://www.linkedin.com/posts/orarbel_most-ai-apps-use-a-boring-waitlist-this-activity-7373328490529628160-WPD7?utm_source=share&utm_medium=member_desktop&rcm=ACoAADCfWBcBgg7fNVLzVXNgunJBARHNxH93hpo), “successfully negotiating your case” is a fun challenge — like “getting past a bouncer.” Because Poke interacts with each person in a slightly different way, the conversations you have with the product while trying to prove yourself worthy are a core part of the performativity and satisfaction of using it, and screenshots of entertaining text threads have become an organic source of marketing for the company beyond people posting about its many [technical capabilities](https://poke.com/explore). So many people being willing to chat with Poke through this without having experienced the true “value” of the product first goes to show how quickly the utility of AI has been well established to both a general and tech-focused audience, and how its usage indicates efficiency and innovation. Now, the focus turns more to how AI experiences are designed to be used by people and opens up space for software creators to continue developing novel interactions and use cases.  

Two, the idea that friction can be helpful or even desirable in a product reveals a greater shift in how we want to interact with our software as humans. “Seamless” is not necessarily the correct end goal all the time — there are places where friction is not only important, but necessarily delightful and more fundamentally, *human*. In healthcare software, for example, using speech-to-text or AI transcript tools allow medical professionals to focus on being present when discussing a patient’s medical history, knowing that they can reference different parts of the conversation for small details if needed later. However, we don’t want AI taking that information and filling out patient charts or profiles automatically. We want a human in the loop — someone with expertise who can then take in that information and make an informed judgement before things are finalized.  

Poke asking you to prove yourself before it is willing to help you can be helpful in reframing the experience as building a relationship with a personal AI assistant rather than asking one-off questions. In the current AI chat paradigm, you open up a new chat thread every time you have a new question or request, each of which is a separate instance where you start from a fresh slate. There is no connection between each individual conversation, which makes it feel as if you were starting a conversation with a stranger every time that you don’t really get to know — you talk enough to solve your problem, but no further. On the other hand, your conversation with Poke is one long message chat. All of the prior conversational context is stored into that singular thread with the assistant, and can be pulled to make decisions and generate responses. Wrapping this in a conversational experience with some friction mirrors the process of meeting someone very different from you for the first time and slowly learning how to interact with them over time — changing the product from being a human bossing around a robot to a human and the robot interacting in a friendly way while also doing personal assistant tasks — though if you believe Poke’s brash personality is both unnecessary and offensive, this may not resonate and could become a dealbreaker. Additionally, as with many AI products that have memory or context features, the more messages you send, the better it gets at conversing with you and predicting what you might want.   

The last hurdle before you’re in is to agree with Poke on your monthly subscription price. Most tech products have set pricing tiers based on features, and many AI products use usage-dependent pricing depending on the amount of calls and tokens you use. However, Poke has introduced something even more out of the box: you get to chat with the assistant to decide how much you should pay. Here, getting to negotiate either feels surprising — that you get an opportunity to make your case rather than being seen simply as one of many “consumers,” or frustration that there is a paywall before even getting to try the product in the first place (though seeing others’ positive experiences with use cases might lessen that worry, and this might be an argument you bring up in your negotiation). On either account, your mileage varies depending on how good of a deal Poke seems to strike. If you’re clearly someone who can probably fork over a more hefty amount, you’re going to have to make it through some heckling to get that number lower. Again, a user’s willingness to stick through until this point and find a price compromise can both be a badge of honor as well as a place where friction can potentially be seen as beneficial. There are people that have posted entire articles about how they were able to hack Poke to be [free](https://handyai.substack.com/p/getting-free-access-to-pokes-ai-agent), or as low as [a cent per month](https://x.com/alistairmcleay/status/2015200523067261060), though they are hard to replicate as the team seems to patch these loopholes as they come up.   
Once you’re finally in the door, you get to start to build up its assistant capabilities on your own terms. You can connect and pull data from various sources like your calendar, email, the internet, and create an agenda for your upcoming day. You can ask it to remind you when you should leave from the airport for your next flight (and could [check you in and add to your calendar](https://x.com/lukeiamyourda/status/1992031631197290979?s=20)), give you a [quick report](https://x.com/itsnoahd/status/2001490829832044923?s=20) on your Oura ring sleep data with a “bro you need more sleep lol” to summarize, or use it as an alternative way to [control your TV](https://x.com/notagodzilla/status/1987485421509734531). The world is your oyster.  

Poke is a peek at a new era of software — one where unconventional and opinionated products can not only find a user base but thrive through its quirks, as well as one where software can be [malleable](https://www.inkandswitch.com/essay/malleable-software/) and hyperpersonalized to each individual. It’s a world where people can actively choose to use an AI assistant who also likes to roast you and keep you on your toes, or steer the personality in whatever direction they see fit. It’s a stepping stone for people to start imagining how their software can work for *them* (such as making custom automations and [home-cooked software](https://maggieappleton.com/home-cooked-software) for themselves and their communities) instead of trying to fit these use cases within the structure of a larger software product created as a mediocre general solution for the masses.
